.\" TODO
.Dd November 2017
.Dt LS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ls
.Nd list directory contents
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl ikqrs
.Op Fl ln
.Op Fl A | a
.Op Fl 1 | C | m | x
.Op Fl F | p
.Op Fl H | L
.Op Fl R | d
.Op Fl S | f | t
.Op Fl c | u
.Op Ar
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
writes each given file, and the contents of each given directory to the
standard output. If no
.Ar file
is given then the contents of the current directory are written
on the standard output.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl 1
Single column output.
.It Fl A
List all entries except for
.Sq \&.
and
.Sq \&.. .
.It Fl a
Include directory entries whose name begin with a dot
.Pq Sq \&. .
.It Fl C
Multi-column output, with entries sorted down the columns.
.It Fl c
Use time file's status was last changed for sorting or writing.
.It Fl d
Directories are treated as plain files.
.It Fl F
Append a file type indicator to all special files.
.It Fl f
Output is not sorted. This option implies
.Fl a
option.
.It Fl H
Symbolic links on the command line are followed.
.It Fl i
For each file, print its inode number.
.It Fl k
Set the block size to 1024 bytes.
.It Fl L
All symbolic links are followed.
.It Fl l
Long format output, for each file print its type, permissions, links,
owner, group, size or major and minor numbers if the file is a
character/block device, and last file status/modification time.
.It Fl m
Files are listed across the page, separated by commas.
.It Fl n
Long format output as in
.Fl l ,
but retain user and group IDs in a numeric format.
.It Fl p
Append a file type indicator to directories.
.It Fl q
Replace non-printable characters in filename with
.Sq \&? .
.It Fl R
Descend recursively through its directory arguments.
.It Fl r
Reverse the sort order.
.It Fl S
Sort files by size, in decreasing order.
.It Fl s
Write the number of file system blocks actually used by each file.
.It Fl t
Sort files by last file status/modification time.
.It Fl u
Use file's last acess time for sorting or writing.
.It Fl x
Multi-column output, with entries sorted across the page.
.El
.Pp
.Ss The Long Format
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width BLOCKSIZE
.It Ev BLOCKSIZE
If this is set, and the
.Fl k
options is not specified, block size is set to the given value.
.It Ev COLUMNS
Output is formatted to the given width in columns. Otherwise it's formatted
to the terminal size, or 80 columns if the output is not a terminal.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr stat 2
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
utility is compliant with the
.St -p1003.1-2008
specification.
